So with larger data sets of
beyond the small to moderate,
then there are a couple of things you
can do when reading in tabular data.
That will make your life a lot easier, and
more importantly it will
prevent R from totally choking.
So first you should read the help page for
read.table.
In fact,
you should probably have it memorized.
There is a lot of key
hints in that help page.
Lot of useful information.
And in my opinion not enough people
read this help page carefully enough.
So that they can kind of
recite in their sleep.
And if I, so there's a lot of so
once you've read that you'll see
there's a lot of important information for
kind of how to optimize read.table.
In particular for large data sets.
And so one of the things
you're going to want to do
is to make a very rough calculation.
Of how much memory you need to store
the data set you're about to read.
And so
that way you can get a sense of well,
is there enough memory on my
computer to store this data set?
Because if you recall correctly,.
R will have to,
R is going to store your entire dataset
in memory unless you do otherwise.
So when you call read.table or
read.csv, it's reading your entire
dataset into the RAM of the computer.
And so you need to know,
roughly speaking, how much RAM
this datasets going to require.
And we'll talk about how to
calculate that in a second.
So another opti,
easy optimization you can say is if
there's no comment lines in your file.
Then just set the comment char to be
the comment.char is meant to be blank.
So just an empty quote there.
The call classes argument
is actually very important.
Because it whe, if you don't specify
it then what R does by default is it
goes through every column of your dataset.
And tries to figure out
what type of data it is.
Now, that's all fine, well I'm fine
when the dataset is small to moderate.
But reading each of these columns and
trying to figure out what type of data it
is takes time, it takes memory, and
it can generally slow things down.
If you can tell R, what type of data,
is in each column,
then R doesn't have to spend the time
to figure it out on its own.
And so, it'll, it'll generally
make read.table run a lot faster.
So you can save yourself a lot of time.
So if you, if,
if you have a few columns in your dataset,
then then you can usually just say what,
what the classes are.
But if you have, or
if they are all the same, so for
example if all the columns are numeric.
You can just say, you can just set
call classes equal to numeric.
And if you only sent,
you give it a single value,
it will just assume that every
column has that same value.
So if you just say numeric it will
assume that every column is numeric.
Otherwise what you can do if
you have a huge data set,
you can read in maybe the first 100 or
first 1,000 rows.
By specifying the nrows argument.
And then going through each of the looping
over each of the columns using sapply and
calling the class function.
So the class function will give you,
will tell you what class
of data is in each column.
And then you can use this, and
then you can save, store this information.
And then read the entire data set after
by specifying the call classes argument.
So the n rows argument is
actually very useful too.
It doesn't necessarily
make R run any faster, but
it does help with memory usage.
And so, if you can tell R how many
rows are going to be read in to,
to the, in to, in to R.
Then it can calculate the memory
that's going to be required.
And not have to kind of
figure it out on the go.
So even if you mildly overestimate how
many rows there are in the data set,
that's okay.
Because it won't make a difference, it'll
still read the correct number of rows.
So in general, when you're using
R with large data sets, and
there's lots of large data
sets out there nowadays.
It's useful to have a few things,
a few bits of information on hand.
So, for example,
how much memory does your computer have?
How much physical RAM is there?
These days in most computers will have
on the order of a few gigabytes up
to many gigabytes of physical RAM.
What other applications are in use?
So are there other applications that are
running on your computer that are eating
up some processor time or memory?
If you're on a multi-use system, are there
other users logged into the system.
Are they using up some of
the resources on the computer?
What is the operating system for
your computer?
So, is it a Mac?
Is it Windows?
Is it Unix?
Is it Linux?
Is it something like that?
And then,
also it's useful to know whether the O,
the operating system that you're
running is 32-bit or 64-bit.
On a 64-bit system there,
there, you'll generally be
able to access more memory if
the computer has a lot more memory.
So if you want to do a rough calculation
before you read in a table into R,
using the read.table or
the read.csv function.
You can just do a very quick calculation.
So here is,
suppose I have a data frame here,
with 1.5 million rows and 120 columns.
So this is not a particularly big
data set but it's reasonable.
so, suppose that all of the nu,
all the columns are numeric.
So, I don't have to worry
about different types of data.
They're all, all the columns are numeric.
The question is how much memory is
required to store this data frame in
memory, okay?
So, I can do a simple calculation.
So, the num, the number of elements
in this data, in this data
frame is going to be 1.5 million times
120, right, because it's a square object.
And so that's, so that's the number
of elements in the data frame.
Now, if it's a numeric all
the data are numeric then each
number requires eight
bytes of memory to store.
Because the, because the numbers
are stored using 64-bit numbers and
there's eight bits per byte.
So that's eight bytes of
memory per numeric object.
So that's going to,
so here's the number of bytes, now
there's two to the 20 bytes per megabyte.
So I can divide that,
the number of bytes by 2 to the 20, and
that's how many megabytes I got.
So it's got, I've got 1,373.29 megabytes.
And I can divide that again by 2 to
the 10 to get the number of gigabytes,
that's going to be roughly 1.34 gigabytes.
So the, the raw storage for this data
frame, is roughly 1.34 gigabytes.
now, you're actually going to need
a little bit more memory than that to
read the data in.
Because there's a little bit of,
overhead required for reading the data in.
And so, and so the rule of thumb,
is to, is that you're going to need
almost twice as much memory to read
this dataset into R using read.table.
Then the, then the object itself requires.
So if your computer only has,
let's say two gigabytes of RAM eh, and
you're trying to read in
this 1.34 gigabyte table.
You might want to think
twice about trying to do it.
Because it, you're going to be pushing
the boundaries of of memory that,
that is required to read this dataset n.
Of course, if your computer has like
four or eight or 16 gigabytes of RAM,
then you should have no problem in
terms of the memory requirements.
It will still take some time just to
read it in just because it takes time to
read in all the data, but
you won't be running out of memory.
So doing this kind of calculation is
enormously useful when you're reading in
large data sets.
Because it can give you a sense of
you know do I have enough memory.
Is the reason, if you grunt any errors,
you'll know whether the error is because
of memory, running out of memory or not.
So I encourage you to do
this kind of calculation when you're
going to be reading in large data sets.
And you, and you, and you know in
advance kind of how big it's going to be